By: VARUN DEB

Tell us how you learned about GCI, how many tasks you worked on, your appreciation of Google's GCI program and the Mifos Initiative as a whole:


Personally, I learned about the Google Code In program from my friends who also enjoy programming very much. Our desire to learn more about coding and technologies fueled our voraciousness in wanting to participate.

I worked on 3 tasks as the session for GCI is now coming to an end. If only I would have heard of this amazing competition sooner, I could have completed an abundance of tasks!

I think that Google's GCI program is a marvelous idea geared towards getting young teenagers to become more involved with programming. And the best part about the program is that you do not need to be an expert in code, as long as you understand the concepts, you can complete many of the proposed tasks. Not only do the tasks teach how to do useful things related to technology, they also end up teaching the user how to use the specific websites. As I worked through all of the tasks, I found myself building a firm appreciation for all of the various fields in technology.

In regards to the non-profit Mifos Initiative, I think that it is great that such large organizations are doing whatever they can to stop poverty. It really reminds me that there are good people in the world who want to put an end to others suffering. I think it's marvelous to integrate technology into ending poverty through an open source banking platform to bring financial services to the people that need it the most. I would truly love to do all I can to help in such a distinguished effort. And to be able to work on these tasks on the mobile device made it very convenient. A team of very intellectual and kind minds can, after all, achieve anything that may originally seem impossible. I will surely do many more tasks with them next time.

My overall experience with GCI was rather interesting. Although each task requires a lot of work, I was able to manage it and balance it without letting it get in the way of my schoolwork. For me, a common difficulty I had to overcome in all of the tasks was figuring out what eactly the objective was. Many of the tasks can look intimidating, so first you should find out whether you feel you can successfully complete the task if you put your mind to it. Regardless, I was able to solve this problem by simply putting the task into my own words and figuring out what was needed to be done. Another problem I faced was being able to navigate through the many directories all the different websites had to be able to complete the task(s). Especially some of the websites were very confusing and difficult to navigate, so I needed to use my expertise in order to complete the navigation process. In some instances where I still needed help, the friendly mentors were able to help me because I could directly ask them questions when I needed help. Some of the tasks required one to screenshot all the different screens in the repositories, for example, and one would need a firm understanding of the website's layout to do so.

Open source contribution greatly helped me in specifically overcoming many of the adversarities the GCI program presented to me. People always say that many minds will always be stronger than one, and that is where the whole concept of open source is built off of. At first, I was a little confused why companies would want their hard work being displayed to the public at no cost, but I eventually realized that the people that view the website/prototype will be the ones in helping to edit the software. And programs like Google's GCI helped towards providing an incentive for teenagers to provide to such causes. In these open source chats, I was able to meet with people who were interested in many of the same things that I was such as coding and mathematics in general. Another great part was that I was able to teach others through chats if they did not understand a concept and that I was able to fix some wordings on an app to make it more relatable to a certain type of audience. Now, I feel as I can successfully say that I helped this company or this nonprofit or this app in its efforts when it becomes prosperous. When I start getting more involved with building my own apps, I will put them up as open source contributios so that others can test and contribute towards my work--there is no 'I' in team!

In retrospect, by completing a few tasks through Google's GCI, I was able to familiarize myself with how much work is constantly being done by people on programs and to help the world everyday. I have also learnt that one can become so successful just by owning a computer which can access the web. This program forced me, for the better, to dive headfirst into the open source community, from which I was able to share many exciting experiences. Just because you are unfamiliar with a few coding languages doesn't mean you are unable to help in contributing, there are many other ways to help establish some great revisions. And with the internet out there, there is no excuses--you must teach yourself to code! Ever since I was young, I have enjoyed coding very much but have never had a truly great purpose to put it to. Finally, I believe I have found a solution to that problem with the help of GCI!